Mention GODEBUG=fips140 in FIPS docs (#1508)
microsoft/go: eng/doc/fips/README.md

>   - [`GOEXPERIMENT` `allowcryptofallback`](#build-option-to-use-go-crypto-if-the-backend-compatibility-check-fails)

Reviewer: Line above this one (too far from a diff to comment directly) mentions `requirefips` and should maybe also mention `GOFIPS140=latest`.

  - [`import _ "crypto/tls/fipsonly"` source change](#tls-with-fips-compliant-settings)
- Runtime configuration:

>   - [`GODEBUG=fips140` setting](#usage-runtime)

Reviewer: I think GOFIPS should still be mentioned here until it's no longer in a supported version of Microsoft Go. (At least, this list was intended to include everything.)

There are typically two goals that lead to this document. Creating a FIPS compliant app is one. The other is to comply with internal Microsoft crypto policies that have been set for Go. This table summarizes common configurations and how suitable each one is for these goals.

> [!NOTE]
> This section assumes the use of Microsoft Go 1.24 or later.
>
> 1.24 introduces `GODEBUG=fips140` as a preferred way to enable FIPS mode. See also [the Go 1.24 changelog](#go-124-feb-2025).

> > 1.21 introduces `systemcrypto`, `requirefips`, and a build-time compatibility check for the selected crypto backend. The Usage sections go into more detail about the differences between 1.19/1.20 and 1.21 in context. See also [the Go 1.21 changelog](#go-121-aug-2023).

Reviewer: Runs together and makes it harder to notice version-specific info when browsing:

```suggestion
>
> 1.21 introduces `systemcrypto`, `requirefips`, and a build-time compatibility check for the selected crypto backend. The Usage sections go into more detail about the differences between 1.19/1.20 and 1.21 in context. See also [the Go 1.21 changelog](#go-121-aug-2023).
```

There are typically two goals that lead to this document. Creating a FIPS compliant app is one. The other is to comply with internal Microsoft crypto policies that have been set for Go. This table summarizes common configurations and how suitable each one is for these goals.

> [!NOTE]
> This section assumes the use of Microsoft Go 1.24 or later.
>

> > 1.24 introduces `GODEBUG=fips140` as a preferred way to enable FIPS mode. See also [the Go 1.24 changelog](#go-124-feb-2025).

Reviewer: I think including `=on` is good to match "to enable FIPS mode" here. Also, I think including the `=on` pretty frequently is good for readers who aren't already familiar with `GODEBUG` and might think that setting `GODEBUG=fips140` will do something on its own.

```suggestion
> 1.24 introduces `GODEBUG=fips140=on` as a preferred way to enable FIPS mode. See also [the Go 1.24 changelog](#go-124-feb-2025).
```

A program built with `systemcrypto` always uses the system-provided cryptography library for supported crypto APIs. This is the case for `opensslcrypto` (always using OpenSSL), `cngcrypto` (always using CNG) and `darwincrypto` (always using CommonCrypto/CryptoKit). If the platform's crypto library can't be found or loaded, the Go program panics during initialization.

The following sections describe how to enable FIPS mode and the effect of the `GODEBUG=fips140` setting on each supported platform.

> [!NOTE]

> > Since Go 1.24, setting `GOFIPS=1` is equivalent to setting `GODEBUG=fips140=on`. The latter is the recommended way to enable FIPS mode. Support for the `GOFIPS` environment variable will be removed in Go 1.25.

Reviewer: I think this doesn't make it clear what `GOFIPS=1` means in Go 1.23.

Author: I'm afraid I don't get what's missing 😅

Reviewer: The PR deletes a lot of info about GOFIPS throughout:

```diff
- The following sections describe how to enable FIPS mode and the effect of the `GOFIPS` environment variable on each supported platform.

To set FIPS mode on Linux, use one of the following options. The first match in this list wins:

- - Explicitly enable it by setting the environment variable `GOFIPS=1`.
- - Explicitly disable it by setting the environment variable `GOFIPS=0`.
+ - Explicitly enable it by setting the environment variable `GODEBUG=fips140=on`.

- This includes disabling FIPS mode if `GOFIPS=0` even if OpenSSL is configured to be in FIPS mode by default. If configuration fails, program initialization panics.

- If the Go runtime detects `GOFIPS=1` and FIPS policy is not enabled [...]
```

And `GOFIPS` is replaced by `GODEBUG=fips140` in many places.

When 1.24 is released, this doc will claim to describe both 1.24 and 1.23. Until 1.24 is released, it needs to describe 1.22 and 1.23. I think the removals and replacements make it so the 1.22 and 1.23 behavior isn't clear IMO.

This note seemed like it might have been trying to bridge the gap, but I don't think it does. (But maybe that wasn't the intent, anyway.)

Author: Thanks for the clarification. What you say makes all the sense. I've reintroduced the `GOFIPS` references.

For testing purposes, Windows FIPS policy can be enabled via the registry key `HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa\FipsAlgorithmPolicy`, dword value `Enabled` set to `1`.

### macOS FIPS mode (CommonCrypto/CryptoKit)

macOS cryptographic primitives are FIPS compliant by default, there is no need for system-wide nor process-wide configuration.
Refer to the [About Apple security certifications](https://support.apple.com/guide/certifications/about-apple-security-certifications-apc30d0ed034/1/web/1.0) page for more information.

This means that setting `GOFIPS=1` or `GODEBUG=fips140=on` will never cause a panic on macOS.
They are still necessary to instruct Go to run in FIPS mode, as there is no system-provided parameter to do so.

Prior to 1.24, CommonCrypto/CryptoKit is not used by Microsoft Go.

## Usage: Extra configuration options

### Build option to require FIPS mode

The `requirefips` build tag is available since Go 1.21. See [the "GOFLAGS" example in the build section](#modify-the-build-command).
The `GOFIPS140=latest` environment variable is available since Go 1.24.

> FIPS mode preference is normally determined at runtime, but both options can be used to make a program always require FIPS mode and panic if FIPS mode is not enabled.

Reviewer: The ordering and bunching together of 1.21 and 1.24 sentences seems like it can be improved:

```
FIPS mode preference is normally determined at runtime, but the `GOFIPS140=latest` and `requirefips` options can be used to make a program always require FIPS mode and panic if FIPS mode is not enabled:

- The `requirefips` build tag is available since Go 1.21. See [the "GOFLAGS" example in the build section](#modify-the-build-command).
- The `GOFIPS140=latest` environment variable is available since Go 1.24.
```

(GitHub doesn't let me put this up as a suggestion because it spans deleted lines. 😄)

---

FIPS mode preference is normally determined at runtime, but the `GOFIPS140=latest` and `requirefips` options can be used to make a program always require FIPS mode and panic if FIPS mode is not enabled:

- The `requirefips` build tag is available since Go 1.21. See [the "GOFLAGS" example in the build section](#modify-the-build-command).
- The `GOFIPS140=latest` environment variable is available since Go 1.24.

> Most programs aren't expected to use this tag. Determining FIPS mode at runtime is normal for FIPS compliant applications. This allows the same binary to be deployed to run in both FIPS compliant contexts and non-FIPS contexts, and allows it to be bundled with other binaries that can also run in both contexts. However, it is useful in some cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most programs aren't expected to use these options. Determining FIPS mode at runtime is normal for FIPS compliant applications. This allows the same binary to be deployed to run in both FIPS compliant contexts and non-FIPS contexts, and allows it to be bundled with other binaries that can also run in both contexts. However, it is useful in some cases:
```

To set FIPS mode on Linux, use one of the following options. The first match in this list wins:

- Explicitly enable it by setting the environment variable `GODEBUG=fips140=on`.
- Implicitly enable it by booting the Linux Kernel in FIPS mode.
  - The Linux Kernel's FIPS mode sets the content of `/proc/sys/crypto/fips_enabled` to `1`. The Go runtime reads this file.

If FIPS mode is required, it configures OpenSSL during program initialization. If configuration fails, program initialization panics.

If no preference is detected, the Go runtime doesn't set the OpenSSL FIPS mode, and the standard OpenSSL configuration is left unchanged. For more information about the standard OpenSSL FIPS behavior, see https://www.openssl.org/docs/fips.html.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer 2: Should that be a WARN instead?

Author: Good point. Will do.

Otherwise, FIPS preference has no effect.

For more information about the standard OpenSSL FIPS behavior, see https://www.openssl.org/docs/fips.html.

> [!WARNING]
> Prior to Go 1.24, setting `GOFIPS` makes the Go runtime attempt to modify the configured FIPS mode.
> This includes disabling FIPS mode if `GOFIPS=0` even if OpenSSL is configured to be in FIPS mode by default.
>
> Since Go 1.24, the Go runtime no longer makes any attempt to modify OpenSSL FIPS mode.

### Windows FIPS mode (CNG)

To enable FIPS mode on Windows, [enable the Windows FIPS policy](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/fips-140-validation#step-3-enable-the-fips-security-policy).

If the Go runtime detects `GOFIPS=1` or `GODEBUG=fips140=on` and FIPS policy is not enabled, the program will panic during program initialization. This may be useful to detect and refuse to run on incorrectly configured Windows systems. Otherwise, `GODEBUG=fips140` has no effect.

For testing purposes, Windows FIPS policy can be enabled via the registry key `HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa\FipsAlgorithmPolicy`, dword value `Enabled` set to `1`.

### macOS FIPS mode (CommonCrypto/CryptoKit)

> macOS cryptographic primitives are FIPS compliant by default, there is no need for system-wide nor process-wide configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
macOS cryptographic primitives are FIPS compliant by default, so there is no need for system-wide nor process-wide configuration.
```

> To set FIPS mode on Linux, use one of the following options. The first match in this list wins:

Reviewer: This isn't really setting the mode anymore, and it might make sense to match the previous suggestion to keep calling it a preference:

```suggestion
To set FIPS mode preference on Linux, use one of the following options. The first match in this list wins:
```

- Explicitly enable it by setting the environment variable `GODEBUG=fips140=on`.
- Explicitly enable it by setting the environment variable `GOFIPS=1`.
- Explicitly disable it by setting the environment variable `GOFIPS=0`.
- Implicitly enable it by booting the Linux Kernel in FIPS mode.

>   - The Linux Kernel's FIPS mode sets the content of `/proc/sys/crypto/fips_enabled` to `1`. The Go runtime reads this file.

Reviewer: Maybe I'm just not connecting a few dots, but (related to https://github.com/microsoft/go/pull/1513#issuecomment-2613282156), how do these work?

`GODEBUG=fips140=on OPENSSL_FORCE_FIPS_MODE=1 go test .`
Seems described by this list: turned on `fips140`, and configuring OpenSSL makes it so that when the Go runtime checks whether FIPS mode is enabled, it gets a `true`.

`OPENSSL_FORCE_FIPS_MODE=1 go test .`
Based on this doc, I'm not sure what this will do. From the ADR, I'd expect OpenSSL's mode to be detected and for the runtime to internally set `GODEBUG=fips140=on` (essentially).

(Or, more broadly, if I use `OPENSSL_CONF`.)

Author: Hmm, when writing the ADR I was thinking on a Mariner / Azure Linux  booted in FIPS mode or Windows with the FIPS policy enabled, and that's what I end up implementing. But you are right, having the FIPS mode enabled at the OpenSSL config level should also set `GODEBUG=fips140=on`. Will fix that, thanks!

Author: https://github.com/microsoft/go/pull/1519

> If the Go runtime detects `GODEBUG=fips140=on` and OpenSSL is not using a FIPS-compliant engine or provider, the program will panic during program initialization. This may be useful to detect and refuse to run with incorrectly configured OpenSSL installations. Otherwise, `GODEBUG=fips140` has no effect.

Reviewer: I think the "preference" language makes it work better while describing both `1` and `0` and `GOFIPS`:

```suggestion
If the Go runtime detects a preference to enable FIPS and OpenSSL is not using a FIPS-compliant engine or provider, the program will panic during program initialization. This may be useful to detect and refuse to run with incorrectly configured OpenSSL installations.

If the Go runtime detects a preference to disable FIPS and OpenSSL is using a FIPS-compliant engine or provider, the program will panic during program initialization.

Otherwise, FIPS preference has no effect.
```

Maybe "enable" and "disable" and "set" aren't even the right words to use anymore in 1.24, because it seems like it's all about enforcement rather than really changing anything.

For more information about the standard OpenSSL FIPS behavior, see https://www.openssl.org/docs/fips.html.

> [!WARNING]

> > Previous to Go 1.24, setting `GOFIPS` would make the Go runtime to try to modify the configured FIPS mode. This is no longer supported.

Reviewer: Previous to -> Prior to, present tense (1.23 can still be ran) (matches other "prior to"s in doc), and I think keeping some more of the explicit description in the note makes sense:

```suggestion
> Prior to Go 1.24, setting `GOFIPS` makes the Go runtime attempt to modify the configured FIPS mode.
> This includes disabling FIPS mode if `GOFIPS=0` even if OpenSSL is configured to be in FIPS mode by default.
>
> Since Go 1.24, the Go runtime no longer makes any attempt to modify OpenSSL FIPS mode.
```

### Windows FIPS mode (CNG)

To enable FIPS mode on Windows, [enable the Windows FIPS policy](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/fips-140-validation#step-3-enable-the-fips-security-policy).

> If the Go runtime detects `GODEBUG=fips140=on` and FIPS policy is not enabled, the program will panic during program initialization. This may be useful to detect and refuse to run on incorrectly configured Windows systems. Otherwise, `GODEBUG=fips140` has no effect.

Reviewer: Mention `GOFIPS`? I think the note earlier might technically cover this, but CNG would be the only backend config section not to explicitly mention `GOFIPS` if we don't include it here.

Author: Done!

For testing purposes, Windows FIPS policy can be enabled via the registry key `HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Lsa\FipsAlgorithmPolicy`, dword value `Enabled` set to `1`.

### macOS FIPS mode (CommonCrypto/CryptoKit)

> CommonCrypo/CrytoKit is FIPS compliant by default. This means that regardless of which mode you set `GODEBUG=fips140` or `GOFIPS` to, the cryptographic functions will always be FIPS-enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CommonCrypto/CryptoKit is FIPS compliant by default. This means that regardless of which mode you set `GODEBUG=fips140` or `GOFIPS` to, the cryptographic functions will always be FIPS-enabled.
```

> CommonCrypo/CrytoKit is FIPS compliant by default. This means that regardless of which mode you set `GODEBUG=fips140` or `GOFIPS` to, the cryptographic functions will always be FIPS-enabled.

Reviewer: It seems like this means this backend will always put the Go runtime into FIPS-enabled mode, considering the ADR. I'm not sure if the implications are interesting enough to be worth mentioning, though.

Author: macOS doesn't have the concept of FIPS mode. It being FIPS compliant is an internal detail that is not surfaced in any API. This means that we don't know if the user intent is to really be in FIPS mode or not. We shouldn't set the Go runtime into FIPS-enabled mode (which means `fips140.Enabled` return true and `crypto/tls` only accepts FIPS compliant settings) unless we have a clear signal, and that signal is `GODEBUG=fips140` or `GOFIPS` on macOS, nothing else.

Reviewer: I see, that makes sense, but certainly isn't what I'd expect based on the ADR, and I think this text is misleading... `CommonCrypo/CrytoKit is FIPS compliant by default`, and `the cryptographic functions will always be FIPS-enabled`, but `crypto/tls` will accept non-FIPS-compliant settings by default? I don't think the doc establishes the different meanings of FIPS modes/compliance well enough to try to make detailed distinctions like this without more direct explanation.

Reviewer: Details like this make me wonder again if it really would be worth splitting this doc up into <1.24 and >=1.24. 1.24 has enough nuance that I worry that trying to describe both is simply not useful for the reader. (It could be as simple as duplicating the doc as the starting point and still maintain it in `microsoft/main`. Keeping it in main would make sure it's still easy to make clarifications that apply to both pre- and post-1.24 without dealing with backports and multiple PRs.)

Reviewer: FWIW, the impression I get from this (and maybe the way to document it?) is that the lack of user intent is a problem that causes a potential compatibility issue, and because we prefer compatibility, we choose not to enable Go runtime FIPS mode in this case.

Author: > I see, that makes sense, but certainly isn't what I'd expect based on the ADR

Let's discuss this in the next team meeting. It might deserve a new ADR or amending the one we already have.

> I think this text is misleading...

Agree, I've rewritten the macOS section to make it less confusing.

>  I don't think the doc establishes the different meanings of FIPS modes/compliance well enough to try to make detailed distinctions like this without more direct explanation.

Good point. I'll create a follow up PR clearly stating what Go FIPS mode means, and how it might differ from system FIPS mode.

FIPS mode is normally determined at runtime, but the `requirefips` build tag can be used to make a program always require FIPS mode and panic if FIPS mode can't be enabled for any reason.

> [!NOTE]
> Since Go 1.24, one can achieve the same effect by setting `GOFIPS140=latest` when building the program.

> > This is the recommended way to build a program that always requires FIPS mode, as it uses the the same mechanism as upstream Go.

Reviewer: Should `requirefips` be described by the note rather than `GOFIPS140=latest`? This would emphasize GOFIPS140 more, and be more consistent with the other prior-to-1.24 notes.

Author: I've reworded all this section to make it less `requirefips`-dependent while adding some more info.
